---
layout: post
title:  "How to create full screen background HTML5 video with cover image"
date:   2017-05-30
banner_image: beach.jpg
tags: [blogging, html5, video, dev, css]
---

So, you want a beautiful full screen background HTML5 video on your site, don't you?

Let's look at the demo first: [mdavid626.com](https://mdavid626.com).

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6O5Ux9a4usk" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<!--more-->

First of all, you will need a fancy video clip. If you already have one, great! If not, then don’t worry you can find plenty of them for free on this site: 

> [coverr.co](http://coverr.co): beautiful, free videos for your homepage

All right, so you picked one? Absolutely amazing, let’s go on.

Today most modern browses support native HTML5 video. Just go to [caniuse.com](http://caniuse.com/#search=video) to check it out:

{% include image_caption.html imageurl="/images/posts/caniuse-video.jpg" 
title="Suport of HTML5 video element amoung browses" caption="Suport of HTML5 video element amoung browses" %}

Basically, every browser supports it. Even Internet Explorer. Great! Not so fast…

On mobile, most of the browsers just won’t play silent background video without user interaction. The user has to initiate the play manually. This means our video just won’t work. The browsers won’t even download the first frame of the video. This means, you will see basically nothing. 

Therefore, we will use a little workaround here. We’ll place a static cover image as a background for the video. If the browser doesn’t understand the video tag or just chooses not to play or download it, then the user will see the cover image. Which is of course not the so fancy as the video, but it’s good enough.

To add the video just use this simple markup:

{% highlight html %}
<div class="video-cover">
    <video class="video" muted loop autoplay preload="auto">
        <source src="Palm_Trees.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>
</div
{% endhighlight html %}

Of course, you can add additional source elements, supporting more media types, like OGG or WEBM. Add every format you have. Make sure you configured the proper MIME types on your web server. See [this](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Supported_media_formats ) page for more details. 

We will position and style the cover image purely with CSS. No Javascript or jQuery required.

Start with this little CSS for providing better cross-browser consistency in the default styling of HTML elements:

{% highlight css %}
html,
body,
div,
video {
    margin: 0;
    padding: 0;
}

html,
body {
    height: 100%;
}
{% endhighlight css %}

If you use a library like Bootstrap, then you probably have something similar there already, so you can ignore it.

Positioning of the video element is really simple:

{% highlight css %}
.video {
    position: fixed;
    top: 50%;
    left: 50%;
    z-index: -100;
    min-width: 100%;
    min-height: 100%;
    transform: translate(-50%, -50%);
}
{% endhighlight css %}

